Today's episode is sponsored by
Datadog a modern full stack
monitoring platform for cloud infrastructure,
applications, and logs metrics, all
in one place from their
recent report on serverless, adoption
and trends. Datadog found half
their customer base using ECC
twos have now adopted AWS
Lambda. They've examined real world
serverless usage by thousands of
companies running on millions of
distinct serverless functions. And they
found that half of the
Lambda invocations run for less
than 800 milliseconds, you can
easily monitor all your serverless
functions in one place and
generate serverless metrics straight from
Datadog. Check it out yourself
by signing up for a
free 14 day trial and
get a free t-shirt visit
datadog.com/hanselman it's show to get
started. That's datadog.com/hansel minutes. Show
to get started. Hi, this
is Scott Hanselman. This is
another episode of Hansel minutes
today. I'm talking with mega
Virginie. She's a data scientist
with . How are you?
Hi Scott. I'm good. How
are you? I am very
well. So you work in
data science at a company
called . What does the
Giza even mean? That's an
interesting name. It means wisdom.
And because we come from
our consulting firm, we are
using all of this to
provide solutions and I think
it's very apt considering the
space we are in. Yeah,
it is. And as a
space, as a data scientist,
but you didn't start out
in, in data science, you
were interested in telecommunications and
engineering. Yes. I started out
in electronics and telecommunications. My
major was electronics, but again,
all of this space, I
started doing a lot of
robotics. I think that's where
I got hooked to data.
And you know how you
are using data to make
sure something works. You know,
it's just one sentence zeroes
when you look at it,
but those ones and zeros
are moving something. So I
think that's how I got
into this field. And then
a lot of analysis, Oh,
my robot has to go
straight, but it is not
going straight. Let me look
at the data. And then
I think that's how I
slowly moved into this field.
Yeah. When I started out
with like basic databases in
the early nineties, I just
thought about it in terms
of tables, but then robots
and IOT and like streaming
data, click stream, like data
over time is so fascinating,
huge, huge amounts of data
that can be presented. And
then if you have a
fleet of robots, like it's
like one robot, all of
its things, it can do
all of its axes. Then
you times that by an
number of robots or cars
or thermostats or whatever, and
suddenly a very simple problem
with a couple of tables
suddenly became a massive data
store. And there's so many
questions you can ask it.
Yes. I think we call
it like increasing dimensions, yard
dataset. Okay. You were only
looking at like you said
access, but now you have
like five different degrees of
freedom. The robot is moving
in so many directions and
yeah, I think once it
goes beyond your neat structured
tables, things get a little
bit complicated. Again, this is
not data science. This is
just data. We are not
doing any science here, but
I think it was a
good place for me to
start Well. So data, yeah,
the data science, like you
said, it does start with
data. And then you add
in and number of sources
and, you know, X number
of you change the frequency
or the sampling rate. And
you have a huge amount
of data. That's just like
you said, ones and zeros.
The data science starts where,
when I guess a business
person has a question, Not
necessarily a business person, even
when you are looking at
the data. And if you
have a question, it could
start from you also, because
one of the things that's
important for us is to
read those ones and zeros
and put it in some
context, because again, zeros and
ones don't make sense, but
in a context, they tell
a story, what is it
saying? And is it a
problem? Should I solve it?
Get some other data, be
bought into this context to
solve this problem. So it
doesn't necessarily have to come
from the business. I mean,
it always usually does, but
it does start from ourself
also, right? These questions come
from anywhere, right? And then
the idea of bringing data
from somewhere else again, when
I started out, I thought
about a table join and,
and for me, data was
limited to the database I
was working in. But Diana,
I know that data scientists
draw correlations and effectively table
joins between databases by saying,
well, this data correlates to
that. Or I could bring
a map or some map
tiles or whatever. And now
I can see my robot
on a map and pull
from multiple sources to ask
an answer. Yes. I don't
know how many offers that
actually build that much of
a complicated, a high level
of stuff. Maybe, you know,
you can do data science,
even on just one database
and tables and just joints.
You don't always have to,
you know, use live, click
stream data or Twitter data
with addition to your database
to come up with useful
insights, you can use what
you have. But again, there
has to be substantial data.
I'm not saying, Oh, I
have like two weeks worth
of data. Please tell me
what's going to happen two
years down the line. That's
that's ambitious. But all I'm
saying is it's not always
necessary. That more data means
a good thing. Okay. Well
that actually brings me to
a really good question. Then
when does a database person
or someone who is select
star from this and that
with a modest database, when
do they become a data
scientist? When does database administrator
or data Wrangler graduate? If
I'm going to get into
this field and when does
it become science? So again,
are you solving any problems?
Are you doing your select
star for a purpose of
something? Okay. Let's say you're
doing a select star, all
my employees in the company.
Why do you want to
see the probability of someone
leaving? Do you just want
to be more prepared again?
Like let's say, because I'm
in consulting, there is this
concept of a bench where,
you know, even though you're
just waiting for the projects
to roll in and you
have a resource ready to
go. So if I am
a database administrator, I will
do okay. Select star my
projects and my employees. But
if I want to be
a data scientist, what am
I going to do? What's
coming in. How many resources
will I have at that
point of time? And how
do I make the data?
Tell me how many resources
I need at any point
of time. You know what
I'm trying to go with
this. Does that make sense?
What I'm hearing is there's
a question very often a
predictive question. There's some data
that represents some historical context,
but some business context that
I may or may not
understand. And like you said,
it's like, I can answer
basic questions. Like give me
all of the people and
their salaries and sort, but
I could ask more complicated
questions. Like, is this division
losing people? Why are they
leaving? Why are people enter
this division? And then leave?
Like, I can answer all
kinds of questions over time
that are going to predict
the future. Like you said,
Right? Do you see a
trend somewhere? Are all the
people living from a particular
age group or are they
all leaving after? You know,
let's say there is this
amazing project, but as soon
as you're placed there, everyone
just leaves. Is there something
going on, you know, finding
a trend or a story
within your database, once you
start doing that, once you
start analyzing your data and
giving it a context, I
think you can say, yeah,
Pew, you're touching the basics
of data science. So when
does data science start to
get into machine learning? Because
I know that you do
some work in AI as
well. Like if I were
going to make a model
and then make a prediction,
I make a predictive model.
Am I an AI engineer?
Am I a machine learning
engineer? Or am I still
in the space of, of
data science? Or are they
the same thing? They're all
the same thing. I mean,
they're all in the same
space, but I think it's
awfully late. That few are
breaking up how they define
data science because it's such
a wast field. And what
you do is all specific
to the problems you are
trying to solve are specific
to the company or working
for. So now we have
like machine learning, engineers or
algorithms research. These guys are
only working towards how do
we make our machine learning
algorithms better or faster or
more accurate, but AI engineers,
they are, they're trying to
do more deep planning stuff.
But again, all of this
is data science. I mean,
yeah, you are using your
data to using your data
and science behind it to
come up with solutions. How
are you doing that is,
you know, you can just
break it. Are you doing
cutting edge research? Are you
just applying predictive analytics or
statistics? It all comes down
to what you're trying to
do. I think Here's the
part that I find confusing
though, is we are creating
these models, these AIS, these
systems of data science that
are using historical data, right?
Because by definition, all data
is from the past. It
is very likely imperfect data.
And then it is going
to then express or we're
going to hope it expresses
some theoretical predicted future. It
seems so ridiculous that we're
building models. Assuming that past
results can predict future ones.
And that's where the jump
I think is, is so
challenging. I think this is
where a BI comes into
place. I mean, before AI,
there was always business intelligence
and business intelligence mostly is
to make sure that there
is data integrity. And that
would be a good starting
step. Okay. I know you
say you have data, but
is that data right? That's
where BI comes in and
probably using the correct data.
You're just saying, again, we
are not stating that, Oh,
this happened in the past.
It will happen in the
future. All we are saying
is there is a high
probability of this happening in
the future. We don't talk
in these terms, do their
business. But you know, as
statisticians, we are always like,
okay, there is an error
percentage, but we are leaning
towards the possibility that this
is happening are going they'll
happen. And if it's more
than like 50, 50, yeah.
It's a true or false
at this point. So you're
really just trying to beat
a coin flip. Yes, no,
yeah. I mean, let's say
I flip a coin a
hundred times. Can you say,
what am I going to
get in the next five
times? Nope. So it's pretty
much, but yeah, I know
it's not that simple, but
no, we are. We cannot
say for sure that this
will happen in the future,
but we can say, okay,
I'm 90% sure that this
will happen in the future.
So when you go and
you want to test these
models, you've got some data
you're thinking about testing some
prediction about it. You're making
this predictive analytic analysis model.
I understand that there's a
training dataset. There's a test
data set. Maybe there's a
validation data set. What is
the relationship between the training
data set? The thing that
you're training and on, do
you train it on all
of your data or do
you pick and choose? How
do you make the decision
about what you train on?
Because I understand that picking
the wrong training dataset, like
garbage in garbage out. Right?
Right. So don't pick, make
it as random as possible
because if you want to
your model to work again,
the whole reason of training
and testing is because once
you are going to deploy
it, the data which the
model is going to ingest,
you don't know how it's
going to be. So why
do you want to train
it on a specific kind
of data? And then once
you deploy it, it doesn't
work because the data that
you are getting in real
time is completely different. So
you're essentially training it. You're
training it to be as
robust as possible. And if
you pick it, you're probably
going to get like, Oh,
it's 98% accurate, which means
you're probably overfitting the data.
So make it as random
as possible once you train
it and you say, okay,
it works. Just test it
out, test it out on
a data, which was not
part of the training set
to see, okay. If I
ever deploy it in a
real time situation, how is
it going to be? And
probably that's the only relationship
between training and testing, both
as random as possible, but
80%, 20% is what we
most usually do. Now. You
used a word there that
I don't think everyone caught.
You said overfitting maybe you've
overfitted that. And if you
could talk about what an
overfitted statistical model is, It
would say, let's go back
to the quietness. I tossed
my client a hundred times.
I got 98 times heads
and two times tales. And
I'm training a model on
this and I'll just say
my model. Okay. What is
the probability that just tell
me what's going to happen
in the next five tries
based on this data, it's
going to tell me it's
probably going to be hit
because you know, 98 out
of a hundred is a
high thing. So this is
what overfitting is. Your data
is so skewed and your
model is so accurate and
perfect. It just thinks, Oh,
this is how the data
always is Interesting. Okay. So
you're saying that you have
pulled out some variation, some
noise, and then now you
think that noise represents reality.
Like I happen to pick
five heads in a row
that's sample. I go and
fit to that. And now
what should be a random
50, 50 is now a
hundred percent because I've completely,
overfitted based on a piece
of noise that now potentially
represents the, the model's structure.
I've lied to myself. Yes.
That essentially is what all
fitting is. How do you
know what happens though? Like
if you're working with data
like coins, I can see
that you can look at
it and think it through.
But if you're working on
something big and complicated, like
voting, you know, or something
like that, how do you
know that? You're right. Because
that's the thing you're asking
a question to which you
don't necessarily know the answer.
Well, let me, let me
back up. There are data
science problems for which I
don't know the answer so
I can make a model.
And I still don't know
if I got it right.
And then there's stuff where
I can actually say I've
trained this. And now I
know that I got it
right. Because I have a
validation piece of data, a
data set that's valid. That's
validatable Well, you know, it's
a funny story. If the
answers are too good to
be true, it means we've
probably overfit them. It's an
unfortunate part of the job.
But no, generally in reality,
we are not supposed to
get such perfect models are
such perfect fit. If you
say, Oh my God, your
model is working with 98%
accuracy. We know we all
affected, like you ask anyone,
we just, we just know
it. So we go back,
we change our training sets
or testing sets, or we
just create random data sets
and see, okay, what's going
on? And then we try
to change the variables to
unit and make sure, Oh,
what comes up again? Yeah.
Interesting. That's all it is.
It's a lot of trial
and error because when you're
working with such huge data
sets, you can't go line
by line or table by
table and figure out what's
going on. I heard someone
say once that overfitting is
when the model is starting
to memorize the data, as
opposed to learning the data.
Yeah. That that's a good
way to put it right.
Instead of seeing the trends,
it's just like, this is
what the data is. So
this is what the data
will look like. Not that,
Oh, after every four or
five tries, I'm getting ahead.
So every four or five
tries I will get ahead,
you know? Yeah. No, that's
a good analogy. All right.
That makes me happy. I'd
like to welcome our new
sponsor. Couchbase Couchbase is an
open source. No SQL document
and key value store database
requires no external cash supports
CQL and analytical queries for
Jason data. Couchbase supports technologies
like Kubernetes, java.net, JavaScript, go
and Python. Download it, give
it a try at couchbase.com/hansel
minutes. That's couchbased.com/hansel minutes. And
I'll remind you that when
you support our sponsors, you
support this show. How often
do you find yourself doing
these kinds of cool Hetty
things that we've been talking
about versus just cleaning data?
Like how much are you
a data janitor versus a
scientist? 80% of my job
is killing the data. Yes.
Modeling hardly takes, I wouldn't
say hardly, but modeling takes
up much less time than
I wish a lot of
it is data cleaning or
more, more so data gathering.
Really the number of times
I had to just like,
where is the data? Where
is the data I need
not just you'd really need
to start with defining a
problem. Okay. This is the
problem. What is causing this
problem? Do we have data
relevant to that? Just because
I know let's pick an
example for watering. You want
to see how the watting
outcome is going to be,
how is weather going to
affect that? I have so
much data and it's all
weather data. Is that going
to affect my ordering? Probably
not. So data gathering is
step one and then comes
the data cleaning, making sure
that, okay, I have this
vision or this spot, which
are these, these algorithms that
I'm going to use. How
do I wrangle the data?
So unfortunately, 80% of my
job is just being a
data janitor. So you are
filtering out things that you
don't want. You're removing things.
You're dropping things. I presume
that you're removing outliers of
a certain kind Outliers of
a certain guide are, you
know, cutting down dimensions. Because
if two things probably say
the same thing to me,
I have one column it
says is hot. The other
column it says is not
cold. They probably bought me
the same thing. So just
cutting those things out, yes.
Starts with filtering. Then making
sure that I don't have,
you know, missing values or
just random data, which is
not part of the trend.
And then again, next step,
what am I trying to
do? Do I have enough
In the, in the real
world kind of work that
you're doing? I'm curious about
this because I learned it
in school, but I've never
dealt with it in the
real world. Is how often
is the normal distribution? Like
the bell curve that we
always talk about a real
thing? Or is that just
a thing we learned in
school? Is that true? I
haven't come across it yet,
to be honest. So it's
statistics aren't as clean as
we think they might be
when you apply variants and
a lot of stuff, You
would just go with the
assumption that it doesn't all
want distribution, but if you
actually put it, I think
I've, I did try it.
I had the same question
as you did. Okay. Is
this following a normal distribution?
Am I going to get
that nice inverted you graph?
No, but all these statistical
tests are better on the
assumption that your data is
normal distribution. And you just
go ahead with fate. They're
not perfectly you, but yes,
you see outliers and you
see a lot of the
data falling into a group
in a way, yes, normal
distribution, but not perfectly normal
As I'm teaching my children,
math and basic statistics, there
are only 12 and 14.
One of the things that
we've been using without swearing,
but I'll use this term,
do they know how to
detect BS? Like, does it
smell bad when you have
a math problem, you should
have a good sense of
smell. You know? And I
understand that when you're a
data scientist, you look at
a dataset, you look at
the top 20 rows and
the bottom 20 rows and
pick some in the middle
and you say, is this
BS, does this smell right?
Does this data make sense
and make whether or not
it makes sense? Depends on
the kind of question you're
trying to ask. Right. Is
it, is it names, is
it addresses? Is it numeric?
Is it lat lawn? You
know, you're, you, you don't
know, given a giant data
set, whether this is nonsense
or not, You don't, you,
you have to get your
hands dirty, spend some time
with it before you just
come to the conclusion that
it is BS, unless it's
a very small data set.
But again, in real world,
we don't deal with small
datasets with the whole advent
of big data and cloud.
And the data set has
grown tremendously. And yeah, you
need to spend some time
with it, run basic exploratory
analysis to come up with
your own conclusions. What data
science tools are you using
if I'm, if I'm listening
to this and I'm thinking
maybe this is a fun,
a fun job is there's
thousands of tools there's even
hundreds and just for visualization,
but what are your kind
of your toolbox of main
tools for being a data
scientist? I use R and
by Tim, they are both
really good and powerful for
data analysis, the, you know,
starting analysis. And then obviously
you should have, if not
absolutely well was, do you
should know how to engineer
your own data. If I
have to say, okay, so
sequel or working with cloud
warehouses, you should have all
these tools. So I work
with snowflake. I work with
sequel. I work with my
turn and R and for
visualization tools, you can visualize
using Python and R, but
if you want tools, power
BI and Tableau, these are
pretty good. I think these
are the standards. So I've,
I've had experience with. And
when you're working with you
say Python and R, is
that something where you spend
time in a Jupiter notebook?
Or where are you doing
this work? I, for our,
our use our, I think
that's the best IDE for
it, for Biden. I use
Jupiter notebooks. I also, because
I said, I do work
extensively with snowflake. Also snowflake
has its new partners called
Zapple. Everything is built on
like a Python, Jupiter notebook
interface, but I've been trying
out new tools. I think
once you can master Jupiter
notebooks, everything else should be
sort of similar. And for
people who don't know, it's
no flick is it's a,
it's a cloud based data
warehouse. So this idea of
a data warehouse is like
more than a database. Like
it's like you think that
this store is big, go
to Costco, that's it? That's
a warehouse. Yes. It is
like that. Instead of one
database, you have more than
one database or maybe one
huge database. However, it makes
easier. It's a whole world
of data that you could
potentially pull from. And you're,
so you're dealing with data
mostly in the cloud. Like
when I was doing work,
20, 30 years ago, I
would be doing it on
a desktop or a laptop.
And I'd be dealing with
only, you know, some gigabytes.
What's the biggest thing you've
ever pushed around. What's the
biggest amount of data you've
messed with. I don't know
in terms of memory, but
I could say in terms
of number of rows, just
one of the tables was
like a 40 million row. Again,
that's small comparatively to the
data sets that people are
using around, but yeah, 40 million
rows. So 40 million rows is
small is a modest dataset.
Yeah. I think once you've
worked with that much data,
everything else seems small, but
no, I speak to people.
They are working in terabytes
of data and trying to
understand, and that's amazing work.
How, where do you start?
So, So you, you said
that that people should start
with Jupiter notebook. So if
you find data interesting, you
can sit down and make
a Jupiter notebook at any
other cloud vendors. Jupiter notebooks
works. If you're using visual
studio code, you can go
and create your own environment
locally, get Python all set
up and start learning Jupiter
notebooks. Do you think that's
a good place to begin
your data science journey? It
is. I know K girl
is amazing. Our, when I
was in school, I would
always go on to Kagel.
They have so many competitions.
They already have notebooks for
someone new to come and
take a look and see,
okay, this is how everyone
else is doing or breaking
down that data. And they
always have new problems and
it's so bad. It's hot
out. I know there are
a lot of data sets
that were put on KCL
by IBM or Google because
they were trying to see
how everyone else is having
a perspective towards this. That
would be the best place
to start because you also
get your hands on data.
There are so many open
data sets, but I think
Cagle is a really good
place to start. You can
choose your language. You can
choose to do it in
Python or R or whatever
other languages you are familiar
with and take it from
there. Okay. And Cagle or
kaggle.com is K a G
G L e.com. I really
liked their homepage because it
says start with more than
a blinking cursor. You know,
you don't teach someone how
to code with hello world,
necessarily. You say here here's
20,000 public data sets, go
play and ask, ask questions.
It's a great way to
get started rather than learning
in the shallow end of
the pool. You just throw
them into the deep end
and see them swim. Yes,
that's true. And as a
data scientist, you always need
to have, or need to
put a context to your
data, and this pushes you
to do that. Well, I
really appreciate you chatting with
me today. This was great.
God, thank you for the
time. Yeah. Appreciate the opportunity.
We've been chatting with mega
Virginia. She's a data scientist
or say Geyser, and we're
learning all about pathways to
data science. This has been
another episode of Hansel minutes
and we'll see you again
next week. .